## Seminar

>"The revenue of the state is the state"
>-- Edmund Burke (1790)

>"His bait we despise, his whip we destroy"
>Ferdinand de Lasalle (?)

Play: Geier Sturzflug Bruttosozialprodukt
Play: Arbeit Nervt (Deichkind)
Play: Movie Sequence Bar Scene

## The logic of bismarckian welfare reform

get worker buy-in
- subsidize (not worker/employee contributions) accident insurance (not liability!) for accidents.
- pensions are long-term (so people might not like a revolution that much)

divide et impera (divide and conquer)
- organize health insurance by locales and status (guilds, civil service, occupations) (to this date!)

## Marshall 1950

## Alireza presentation, starting 11:50


### 11f.
Three elements of citizenship
1. *civil* liberties (of person, freedom of speech, though, faith, property, contracts, right to justice)
    - mostly associated with the judicial system
2. *political* rights (rights to participate in the exercise of political power)
3. *social* rights (right to a modicum of economic welfare, up to full sharing)

These used to be bound up in one, but only at a local level.

### 13f.
Evolved in two ways
1. fusion (geographical)
2. separation (functional)
Once they had separated, they developed at different speeds (before that, all mixed up in feudal society)

*civil* rights are the 18th century.
*political* rights are the 19th century.
*welfare* rights are the 20th century


### 29ff.

Habeas corpus: it's a legal thin against imprisonment, but it also etymologically means "to own your body" (as Radu said)

We're now interested in the evolution of citizenship.
Read out 29 first half: 
"Social class" is about inequality, driven by economic development
"Citizenship" is about universal, same rights.
On page 30, 31, explains the difference between *class* and *social class* -- which is not, strictly speaking, about socio-economic *status*


### 35ff.

Marshall points to the difference between *having* rights and what that means in practice (sometimes not very much) -- so the political, and civil liberties are *eroded* if not complemented by social rights.
Discussion question: are we there now?
Discuss this both for civil and political rights.

And on 36: what does it mean if in a real world, this isn't really achieved at all, because of tradition etc? 
Discuss this both for civil and political rights.
Are we there yet?

Try to develop how one *necessitates* the next.


## Rimlinger 1971

### Presentation Brook starts at 20:15
- for once, got the tech right
- great visuals, great talking
- great idea with the graph, maybe a little too short
- maybe add page numbers to the quotes
- well spoken, good voice, emphasis, body language


Change calendard.


### 90

- late industrialization
- because it had to happen fast, liberalism and laissez-faire was not an option
- important: the ancien regime, think about what you may, did feature some rights
- especially of course, "landed" aristocracy vs. "capitalists" 

Stress the old status rights


### 118 accident insurance law

why would Bismarck want that centralized, with state support?


### 120 health insurance

why would he *not* want that to be state organized?


### 121 pensions

why would Bismarck want that centralized, run by the state?


## Esping-Andersen

### Presentation by robert starts at 21:14
great voice, great visuals, really clean and nice picutres succinct text
beautiful analogy with the body (is that from e-a?)
Great to mention the criticism.
Good discussion question!
