Play: Wer soll das bezahlen Jupp Schmitz

## Presentation Maria starts at 14:09
the experiment might be a little unrelated, but other than that quite ambitious and also good.

## Presentation tim starts at 14:37
negative externalities

- go back to the supply/demand thing and explain that in prose
- explain equilibrium (pareto optimum)
- solutions to the externalities
- why education does not work: hayekian argument (it's a fancy way of saying social planning). And: it's not about *rationality*. It is about that this *is* individually rational.


## Presentation andrei starts at 15:39
taxes and price ceilings etc.

## Presentation on macroeconomics (omer) starts at 17:13
good summary of the 



(add later a bit on the historical background)


##DWL

A deadweight loss (DWL) of taxation (see Mankiw) is bad for general revenue (for public goods) and redistributive taxes. In these instances, you want to transfer assets but you don't want to change behavior.

A "DWL" in Pigouvian taxation (e.g. ecotax) (german: "Lenkungssteuer", literally steering tax) to price in externalities (e.g. of common goods) should be as large as possible. You don't want to transfer assets, you only want to change behavior.

Remember that the only way the state can raise revenue is to tax interactions in the market economy. (Note to Max: remember to visualize this).


##Stabilization

- Economic cycles of great amplitude are bad for the economy ...
    - ... factors of production lie idle / are scarce
    - ... there are a lot of frictional costs (people get depressed when they are laid off)
    - ... there are self-reinforcing effects
- Automatic stabilizers stabilize the economy without legislative intervention
    - ... such as: unemployment insurance (props up consumer demand, even when unemployment rises)
    - ... but: people may take this as a windfall and just save more
- Discretionary stabilizers stabilize the economy with legislative intervention
    - (monetary stabilizers)
    - stimulus packages
        - such as: cash-for-clunkers


## Excursus on the Financial Crisis (if there's interest and time)

- Savings Rate
- Investment vs. Consumption
- What is gold?
- Bank runs
- Herding effects
- What is a central bank?


## A tiny bit of normative theory (... of distributive justice)

The difference principle (John Rawls) states that: social inequality can be acceptable if it benefits the least well off.

play: wir sind Helden / Ode an die arbeit


## The Problem of Labor Price Floor

Whenever there is a minimum socially acceptable standard of living, binding price floors in the supply of labor may arise.

Minimum socially acceptable standards of living can take the form of:

- (binding) minimum wage
- welfare handouts
- top-up wages, negative income taxes, etc.

To avoid a DWL in labor markets, we want labor price floors to be as low as possible, more specifically we want the difference between the nominal (pre-tax) and the real (post-tax) wage to be as small as possible, when price floors may otherwise be binding.

## Welfare States

... redistribute and/or insure 4.5 big risks of life (in rough temporal order of introduction)

1. accident
2. health
3. unemployment
4. old age
5. (rearing children)

See big table on the blog.

Play: arbeit nervt / Deichkind

### Decommodification

>Commodification is, when all, or a large share of life's necessities are provided only as a function of labor market participation.

### Corporatism
... for our context, is when economic production or welfare provision are organized according to (status) group membership, including trade unions, guilds (formerly), religion, etc.

### Debate
What's the perfect welfare state?

- We will have a debate on which of Esping-Andersens' Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism is the best.
- Please choose on camp:
    1. Conservative, Corporatist / Continental Welfare State
    2. Social democratic / Scandinavien Welfare State
    3. Liberal / North-Atlantic Welfare State
- Prepare yourself for the debate. Read the Newton & van Deth chapter on the welfare state and google some arguments for or against teh different welfare state regimes.

Here are the details for our second debate:

We will debate the motion:

>This house believes that the conservative/corporatist welfare state is the best of all possible worlds.

Sign up for one of the roles on the assignments spreadsheet.


# Readings

## Mankiw 2004

### Reading Questions
- #Mankiw2004 What kind of good is discussed in Hardin's Tragedy of the Commons?
- #Mankiw2004 Name one example each for 1) a private good, 2) a natural monopoly or club good, 3) a common good and 4) a public good that are not mentioned in the text or posted by someone else.
- #Mankiw2004 Name one example each for 1) a positive and 2) a negative externality that are not mentioned in the text or posted by someone else.
- #Mankiw2004 In your own words, explain figure 2 on page 206.


# Key terms
- define #keyterm progressive tax
- define #keyterm proportional tax
- define #keyterm regressive tax