## Seminar

Play: Eurohymne (Klazz Brothers)


## Presentation Gianina (starts 20:13)
- maybe a little too much text, small font
- decent summary, well done -- also good discussion question


## Key Institutions / EU Governance

- The European Union, an organisation sui generis 
    - Is it just an international organisation?
    - Is it a federation, or a state?
- Council of Ministers / aka European Council (Legislative)
    - Ministers of the EU-27
    - Heads of state/government of EU-27
    - They "founded" the EU
    - Fathers of the Treaties
    - They can change the treaties (by unanimity)
- European Parliament (Legislative)
    - Voice of the European people, not their governments
    - Parliament can act only with limited authority within the confines of the treaties
- European Commission (Executive)
    - The Guardian of the Treaties
    - Commissioners are supposed to represent the EU, not their member states
- European Court of Justice (ECJ) (Judiciary)
    - interprets the treaties
    - promotes EU Law
- Do not confuse the EU with:
    - ≠ Council of Europe (KSZE Helsinki accord)
    - ≠ European Court of Human Rights
    - ... these are classic international organisations that have nothing to do with the EU


##Drivers of European Integration

We'll consider two main drivers of European Integration, and assume that the others (regulatory harmonization, common foreign and security policy) are either:
- not very well developed yet
- an institutional correlate of the below drivers (regulatory harmonization is required for the Single Market)


##1) The Single Market

... is created by three freedoms

1. Free Movement of Goods and (later) Services (Free Trade)
2. Free Movement of Factors of Production (Free Movement of Capital)
3. Free Movement of People


##2) European Monetary Union (EMU)

### Optimal currency are presentation (sneha) (starts at 20:32)
- not sure what the first example with ecuador matters?!?
- lower and more stable inflation rate, yes
- increased trade
- lower interest rate
- interesting quote

### Comment on the collective action problem of a currency union!
### Comment on the suboptimal currency area!
interesting 

Remun is definetely better than the other guy.

## presentation by remun on tax competition
starts at 21:30
this is very good work on the math, you have to note that!

Genschel is actually a crappy text for this 

## Siddarth presentation on Offe starts at 22:08
- used prezi (questionable)
- maybe too much black lines in the background?
- really good work on the technical stuff; "mututalization of debt"
- really good explanation of technical stuff such as negative integration.
- (sorry that much of his thunder was taken away)

## Ilia presentation on Habermas
- starts at 22:15
- text is too long -- this isn't a notepad, it's a powerpoint
- not so much spot on on Habermas
- went pretty much of script, not so much about babermas
- the game seems interesting -- but I did not understand it, or understand why it matters. the notion of a "zero-sum game" (or a constant-sum game) was actually a little confused.