## Seminar notes
- To subsantiate Goldhagen's claim of German essential hatred of Jews, consider the Luther quotes (Hilberg 1961: 9ff), also the tables p6ff.
- cite Hilberg 1961: 43ff on the actually *not* biological definition of Jewishness; but merely religion (which works a little bit with judaism, because historically, it was a non-proselatizing religion), note however that the laws were framed as racially defined.
	-it lated turned more ratial, see e.g. Hilberg 1961: 46 middle of the page about german women
- note for later that as per Hilberg 1961: 265 the method of killing was not specified only that the Jews were " to be dealt with accordingly"; -- that is meaningful in the context of Zimbardo and Arendt. Governments don't have to order evi
- not the language in Hilberg 1961, how these vague administrative terms are operative "gesundes volksempfinden"

- maybe cite the poem "last uns nicht alleine, vergebt uns nicht" up top, together with death is a master from germany

## Goldhagen1996
- is *not* an Intentionalist, because Germans were "hitlers willing executioners"
- is opposed to social psychology, because it humanizes the perpetrator, not the victim
    + evidence that there was some choice
    + germans killed with gusto
    + no evidence of repercussions for non-participants, but maybe some cognitive dissonance


## Browning 1992

### Anais presentation on Goldhagen
starting 11:40



#

#Key Terms

- define #keyterm Shoah
- define #keyterm Holocaust


#Other Material
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DSAKc3fO1Zk


#Readings

##

## Browning 1998

Quote some of the historical evidence that Browning provides. Include page numbers.

- a small minority of non-participants
- a minority of pathological sadists
- and a majority of (willing?) participants
- the regime/state wanted orderly killings
- the state was acutely aware of the psychological costs


###Reading Questions
- #Browning1998 67: What would a Manichean tale be?
- #Browning1998 56: What, according to Browning, is Goldhagen's explanation of the holocaust?


##Bauer 2001

Please post some pertinent quotes as comments here.

- historians have / ought to have biases
- the holocaust did happen; therefore it can happen again
- no black-white thinking (manichean tale)
- the horror of the Holocaust is not that it deviated from human norms -- but that it didn't


###Reading Questions

- #Bauer2001 Why does Bauer list his biases? Do you agree with his reasoning?
- #Bauer2001 7ff: According to Bauer, is (and should) the "Holocaust" (Shoah) be explicable?
- #Bauer2001 9: What is Lemkin's / the United Nations definition of a genocide?
- #Bauer2001 10: What definition does Bauer suggest for "Holocaust", as opposed to genocide?
- #Bauer2001 11: Why, according to Bauer, does it not make sense to include political and religious groups in a definition of a genocide? What are some of the examples he cites? Do you agree?
- #Bauer2001 13, 39ff: What is Bauer's opinion on comparing genocides?
- #Bauer2001 2f.: Why, according to Bauer, should we concern ourselves with the "Holocaust" (Shoah)?
- #Bauer2001 2ff: What are Bauer's biases? Do you agree with him?
- #Bauer2001 e.g. 42ff: Does Bauer think 'Death is a Master from Germany?' Why?
- #Bauer2001 45: What, according to Bauer, are the three 'motivations' for killing the Jews?
- #Bauer2001 47f: What, according to Bauer, set the Holocaust apart from other genocides?
- #Bauer2001 4f: What do "intentionalist historians" believe? Does Bauer agree with them?
- #Bauer2001 50f: What is meant by 'furor teutonicus', and does Bauer agree?
- #Bauer2001 51: What, according to Bauer, may be the most frightening thing about total humiliation in Nazi death and concentration camps?
- #Bauer2001 53ff: What, according to Bauer, made the Jews a 'peculiar group of people' to the Nazis?