#Seminar

>"Das Lied vom Nigger Jim"
>"The Song of Nigger Jim"
>-- Hans Albers, Operetta "Hopsa", Recorded 1950
> <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M5puXj6RNfU>
>
>Das ist das Lied vom Nigger Jim,
>Den packte oft ein wilder Grimm,
>Denn seine Färbung war ja Vererbung,
>Und keiner hörte seine Klagelieder an
>
>This is the song of Nigger Jim,
>He was often in a wild rage,
>'Cause his complexion was hereditary
>And no one listened to his jeremiads

## Presentation Zaina: Is Racism genetic
starts at 14:18
- bit short, not very great question, a little confsued about the content. Question and discussion are not so well-focused on the topic at hand
- not very convincing visualiation of hamilton's rule

alina and maria are present, and where in the mornign

zaina is present

Tom is very good, so is robert, brook (in descending order)
Tom is to the point.


people can also use magic charts
---

Today we're asking ourselves: why of all the criteria would racism be based only on *some* of them?


- mainstream evolutionary thinking: "survival of the fittest" gene (!) (cf. E. O. Wilson "Sociobiology")
    - maybe replaced by culture?
    - the whole nature (genes) vs. nurture (culture) debate is not very important for us. Whatever the carrier of behavior, a similar (evolutionary) logic may apply.
    - draw the diagram: nature is the hardware, culture is the software. 
    - In between is epigenetics (firmware?)
    - There is a co-evolution of genes and memes
    - (Also consider: epigenetics).
- there's natural and sexual selection.
- in natural selection it's all "every one for herself", or is it?
- van den Berghe / genetic nepotism says: you're willing to sacrifice yourself to the extent that you're related to whomever you're benefiting.
- consider how the social world looked like in a prehistoric, pre-agrarian, hunter-gatherer setting (greatly stylized, with no claim to archaeological accuracy)
    - small groups of <100 people
    - nomadic lifestyle
    - little geographic movement
    - near "panmixia", very homogeneous in the immediate surrounding in terms of biology and phenotype
- contrast that to the (also stylized) modern condition:
    - huge groups
    - we move a lot, and over great distances
    - different phenotypes meet (think: colonialism)
- Excursus: The Sociobiology of Inequality and Sex/Gender (if interested, and if we have time)
    - Explain: Low-status male violence
    - Explain: the "slut"-double standard, penis size, "female copulatory vocalization"
    - If you're interested in this stuff, read: "Sex at Dawn", and "The Spirit Level" (see recommendations)

... consider what this means for resolving Prisoner's Dilemmata ...

Evolutionary traits are emergent phenomena, meaning: evolution does the thinking for you.

Clarifying different types of research, and the status of it (including vdBerghe)
- positive research: what is true?
    + "a priori" (before the fact), including logic and evolutionary theory
    + "a posteriori" (after the fact) empirical work
- normative research: what ought to be?


## Game theory

Axioms stipulate that players are
1. independent
2. rational
3. utility-maximizers

best response is *given* what the other guy does
dominant strategy is a best response, no matter what the other player does
nash equilibrium = mutually dom. strategies

Do a PD, do it again for siblings.
The logic changes. Maybe fix the numbers before so that it actually works.

#Key Terms

- define #keyterm The Selfish Gene (Dawkins)
- define #keyterm Nature vs. Nurture
- define #keyterm Sociobiology
- define #keyterm (Genetic) Nepotism

#Reading

#van den Berghe 1981
- #vandenBerghe1981 Why would we behave nepotistically?
- #vandenBerghe1981 20: "The ultimate unit of replication is the gene, not the organism". What does that mean?
- #vandenBerghe1981 27: What are things we might use to day to build "ethnicity" or "extended kinship"?
- #vandenBerghe1981 In your opinion, does "extended kinship" still work today?
- #vandenBerghe1981 28f.: What makes for a good ethnic marker? Can you think of some?
- #vandenBerghe1981 is van den Berghe a racist? Why?