#Seminar

>"Tommorrow belongs to me"
>Cabaret, John Kander (1966)
><http://vimeo.com/34654296>

- Constructivism: the social world around us comes into existence only through thinking about it, constructing it, perceiving it
    - sort of like: quantum physics, Heisenbergs uncertainty principle. The object changes by observing it.
    - or, put very plainly: " 'truth' lies in the eye of the beholder"
- as opposed to, for example, materialism: the social world objectively exists, it is out there
    - sort of like: Newtonian physics.
- all ethnic groups are socially constructed
- opposite of essentialism
- Compare this to "college spirit"
- "Ethnicity" is something that is created by ethnic entrepreneurs, who, citing Max Weber,  "live off, as well as for ethnicity"
- Ethnicity = people with a shared belief in a putative common descent
- As analysts, ethnicity is a perspective on the world, never an objective thing in the world.
- It is what we want to explain, not what we want to explain things with.
- for a broader, political-economic argument on the role of constructing categories for exploitation, compare Charles Tilly (1998): "Durable Inequality"
- Groupism is, the tendency to assume groups to be:
    - discrete (not amorphousm, not continuous)
    - sharply differentiated (not overlapping, similar,)
    - internally homogeneous (vanilla cookie dough) NOT internally heterogenous (chocolate chip cookie dough) THINK ANOVA
    - externally bounded (not open)
- Ethnicity is groupness when: we mistake categories for actual groups
    - categories are:
        - attached earlobes
        - black skin
        - worker
        - jewish faith
    - groups are, have:
        - common agency (we do)
        - common interest (we want)
        - mutually interacting (we meet)
        - -... as, for example, a family does, or a group of friends

- Definition racism:
    - the discrimination of some ingroup vs outgroup ...
    - ... where the categorical difference between the two groups is somehow quasi-biological
    - ... where the difference between the two (or more groups) is somehow imbued with an essential hierarchy
    - (the question is then: why would racism be so salient among all possible forms of discrimination?)

Groups vs categories are
- mutually interacting
- mutually recognizing
- mutually oriented
- communicating
- bounded
- sense of solidarity
- corporate identity
- capacity for concerted action

# Readings

## Brubaker 2002

- #Brubaker2002 164: What, according to Brubaker, is 'groupism'?
- #Brubaker2002 165: What, according to Brubaker, 'is wrong' with groupism?
- #Brubaker2002 166: What does Brubaker suggest we do?
- #Brubaker2002 166: What do you imagine to be the 'performative character' of groupism? Can you think of a personal experience to which this description may apply?
- #Brubaker2002 166ff: What is an 'ethnopolitical entrepreneur', can you think of one?
- #Brubaker2002 167: Does Brubaker think ethnicity is unreal? Why?
- #Brubaker2002 169: What is the difference between groups and categories? Come up with an example
- #Brubaker2002 175: What, according to Brubaker, are the implications? (there are several)
- #Brubaker2002 finally: do you agree?

