#Seminar


## Housekeeping

- explain quiz grades
- upload ppts asap
- be flexible, change of calendar
- will upload midterm oral part grades sunday


## Baumann

"Nazi rule is long over, yet its poisonous legacy is far from dead. Our continuous inability to come to terms with the meaning of the Holocaust, our inability to call the bluff of the murderous hoax, our willingness to go on playing the game of history with the loaded dice of reason so understood that it shrugs the clamours of morality as irrelevant or loony, our consent to the authority of cost-effective calculus as an argument against ethical commandments -- all these bear an eloquent evidence to the corruption the Holocaust exposed but did little, it appears, to discredit",
( #Bauman1989 : 204) ﻿

" In a system where rationality and ethics point in opposite directions, humanity is the main loser.
Evil can do its dirty work, hoping that most people most of the time will refrain from doing rash, reckless things - and resisting evil is rash and reckless. Evil needs neither enthusiastic followers nor an applauding audience -- the instinct of self-preservation will do, encouraged by the comforting thought that it is not my turn yet, thank God: by lying low, I can still escape."
( #Bauman1989 : 206, emphasis in original) ﻿

Bauman1989 , citing #Fein , suggests removing the Jews from the universe of obligations was an important step in the Holocaust. He lists several ways in which this was achieved, including categorization (189f) and exploitation/starvation (191f).
Any thoughts on that?
Can you think of current instances which might similarly distance people from one another and therefore dissolve mutual responsibility? 

Why, according to #Bauman1989  (175ff) does the Holocaust post a challenge to traditional sociology? 
And how would that challenge play out in the #Eichmann  trial? What might his defense argue?﻿

Bauman1989   cites #Hilberg1961  : "When in the early days of 1933 the first civil servant of 'non-Aryan' into a civil service ordinance, the face of the European Jewry was sealed" (27f).
Why, according to #Bauman1989  does that matter?
Do you agree and can you think if examples of current-day categorizations that may be consequential?﻿

What, according to #Bauman1989  are some of the (problematic) implications of understanding morality as a product of society? (169ff)﻿

what, according to #Bauman1989  is the functionalist understanding of the Holocaust? (15f).
Hitlerspecified vague policy (Rid germany of Jews) but left implementation to administration. The link between vague policy and Zyclone B was enabled, says Bauman, by modernity, featuring
- technology
- bureaucracy
- rationality
- and, especially, means/ends ratioanles

Thus, modernity is a necessary condition for the holocaust.

Does that seem plausible?
What would #Goldhagen1996  say?﻿

Why does #Bauman1989  (2ff) suggest we think of the Holocaust  *neither* as an event in Jewish history, nor as an extreme case of a (familiar) regression to primeval, pre-social, "natural" predispositions?
How does that compare to the position the other authors discussed in 1.x take?
Do you agree? Why or why not?﻿

### Brook comment
"The Holocaust provides an insight into the otherwise unnoticed ‘other aspects’ of the societal principles enshrined by modern history" #baumann1989  

Whether modern society needs the Holocaust to develop or whether the Holocaust was indirectly caused by modern society, is surprisingly a chicken and egg dilemma. Baumann argues in Chapter 1 that historians and theologians have failed to accept the modern human nature of the holocaust, as the "precision, speed, unambiguity, knowledge...and bureaucratization" of this killing machine reflects its modernity. He makes the point that sociologists can learn a lot more from the Holocaust about modern society, than modern society has anything to say about the Holocaust and that's a powerful message in my opinion. ﻿


### so, if as #Bauman1989  writes "the Holocaust has more to say about the state of sociology than sociology in its present shape is able to add to our knowledge of the Holocaust" (3) -- what does that tell us about the texts we read for this class?
How might his critique apply to, for example, #vandenBerghe1981 , #Brubaker2002  or even #Zimbardo ?
And do you agree, and why (not)? ﻿


How according to #Rubenstein  (cited in #Bauman1989 ) bears the Holocaust "witness to the advance of civilization" (9, emphasis in original)? ﻿

