#Seminar
‎
>"Thou shalt not be a [passive] victim. 
>Thou shalt not be a perpetrator. 
>Above all, thou shalt not be a bystander."
>-- Inscription on the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum

Play the Israeli national anthem, hatikvah.

This serves as the coda.

Notes on Eichmann in Jerusalem:
- "Eichmann was a Hanswurst" 
- Hatikvah (Hope), the ISraeli national anthem (Shmuel Cohen 1888)
- What is an "act of state" (cf Nuremberg vs. Eichmann vs. GDR-non-trials)Showtrial aspect
- She did want him hanged, but for different reasons


#Other sources


## Guardian Big Ideas

http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/audio/2011/aug/17/big-ideas-podcast-banality-of-evil?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487

Also, here's a great podcast on the banality of evil:

 #Arendt1963


## Arendt vs Fest

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dc6ZEa_8scM#t=28
here's a recording of Hannah #Arendt talking about Adolf #Eichmann, unfortunately only in German.

Notice how the interview starts out with a familiar question: was there anything particularly german about Eichmann?

Maybe the automatic transcription/translation service of YouTube can help here.

 #Arendt1963


## Arendt vs. Gaus

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ts4IQ2gQ4TQ
and here's a longer series of interviews, unfortunately also in German.

 #Arendt1963


## Munich Trailer

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doX2E1vNtY8

And here's a trailer for the 2006 Spielberg movie "Munich" about the Mossad revenge missions against the Black September terrorist group, and its supporters.
I think it could be seen as meditation on some of the same questions that Hannah #Arendt faced at the Eichmann trial in the context of the founding of the state of Israel.
Compare, for example, Golda Meir's position with Hannah Arendt's.


# Key terms

- define #keyterm Act of state
- define #keyterm the banality of evil
- define #keyterm Eichmann trial


#Readings

##Arendt 1963

Share some pertinent quotes from #Arendt1963 and explain your choice.

### Introduction
Here's a little introduction (from the original print version):

http://www.us.penguingroup.com/static/rguides/us/eichmann_in_jerusalem.html

"Even before its publication as a book, Hannah Arendt's Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (which originally appeared as a series of articles inThe New Yorker) generated much controversy. Critics attributed her coverage of the Adolf Eichmann trial to a host of purposes other than simple reporting, such as exposing the role of the Jewish leadership in the Holocaust and raising larger questions about German guilt and the nature of totalitarianism. Arendt was prompted to clarify her intentions in a postscript to the book, claiming in its final sentence, "The present report deals with nothing but the extent to which the court in Jerusalem succeeded in fulfilling the demands of justice" (p. 298). Evaluating the court's success, however, proves to be a more complex endeavor than this statement implies. Adolf Eichmann, the Nazi lieutenant colonel responsible for transporting countless Jews to concentration camps and, in most cases, to their deaths, escaped Germany after World War II and made his way to Argentina, where he lived under a false name until 1960. That year, intelligence operatives from the young nation of Israel kidnapped Eichmann and brought him to Jerusalem to face charges of crimes against the Jewish people, crimes against humanity, and membership in three of the four organizations that the Nuremberg Trials had classified as "criminal." The facts of Eichmann's case had been established before the trial and were never in dispute. However, genocide was a new kind of crime; that the Israeli court did not recognize it as such is, in Arendt's view, "at the root of all the failures and shortcomings" of the trial (p. 267). Arendt writes, "Justice demands that the accused be prosecuted, defended, and judged, and that all the other questions of seemingly greater import...be left in abeyance" (p. 5). Much of Arendt's book illustrates that the larger issues were not set aside during the Eichmann trial, showing how the case "was built on what the Jews had suffered, not on what Eichmann had done" (p. 6).
Eichmann told the court that he saw himself as a friend of the Jews, helping them leave a culture for which they were unsuited and move on to better lives elsewhere. He considered himself an ally of Zionists, whom he thought shared his "idealism." Arendt believes him—at least, she believes that this was how he saw himself. "Despite all the efforts of the prosecution," Arendt writes, "everybody could see that this man was not a ëmonster,' but it was difficult indeed not to suspect that he was a clown" (p. 54). The transcript of Eichmann's examination by Israeli police while awaiting trial prompts her to observe that "the horrible can be not only ludicrous but outright funny" (p. 48). She dwells on his shallow intellect, his clich d speech (which she interprets as a means of consoling himself), his infinite capacity for self-deception, and his profound detachment from reality.

Arendt portrays Eichmann as a "joiner," a conformist, describing him as "a leaf in the whirlwind of time" (p. 32). It is this aspect of his character, according to her, rather than any deeply held convictions shared with the Nazi Party or a rabid hatred of Jews, that accounts for his actions during the war. Apart from determining Eichmann's motivation is the question that, as Arendt observes, must be asked of any criminal defendant: was he aware that his actions were in fact criminal? The prosecution had to assume that he was, as "all ënormal persons'" would be (p. 26). But Arendt asserts that, "under the conditions of the Third Reich only ëexceptions' could be expected to react ënormally'" (pp. 26ñ27). With considerable insight and detail, Arendt explains how Germany's leaders went about creating these conditions, to the point that "conscience as such had apparently got lost in Germany." There were individuals who resisted, she notes, but "their voices were never heard" (p. 103).

In Arendt's view, the real circumstances of Eichmann's actions never came fully to light during the trial. This is why, in part, the trial obscures what for Arendt is "the lesson that this long course in human wickedness had taught us—the lesson of the fearsome, word-and-thought-defying banality of evil" (p. 252). Eichmann claimed that as his job shifted from forcing Jews from their homes to arranging for them to be killed, he was troubled by the new policy but felt duty-bound to obey his superiors. In fact, he said that not following orders was the only thing that would have given him a bad conscience. As far as Arendt can determine, only once did Eichmann act in a way that could perhaps be construed as resistance, when he decided to send a transport of Jews and Gypsies to the ghetto of L dz instead of to Russian territory, where they would have been immediately shot. But, Arendt writes, "his conscience functioned in the expected way only for about four weeks." (p. 95) Arendt does not address directly the question of what Eichmann might have done had his conscience continued functioning "normally." Yet in documenting the results of Nazi efforts to rid other countries of Jews, she concludes that "under conditions of terror most people will comply but some people will not, just as the lesson of the countries to which the Final Solution was proposed is that ëit could happen' in most places but it did not happen everywhere. Humanly speaking, no more is required, and no more can be reasonably asked, for this planet to remain a place fit for human habitation" (p. 233). We could take this as evidence that the only hope of preventing future catastrophes must lie in a morality that is inherent in human nature. On the other hand, Arendt considers Eichmann "terribly and terrifyingly normal" (p. 276).Eichmann in Jerusalem leaves us wondering not only if justice was achieved in Eichmann's case, but also whether the lessons Arendt believes the trial has taught will make a difference in the future."

### Reading Questions
- #Arendt1963 47ff Why does Arendt consider Eichmann's "almost total inability ever to look at anything from the other fellow's point of view" a decisive flaw?
- #Arendt1963 Is the fact that Eichmann turns out not to be a "monster" a good or a bad thing in terms of its implications for the future?
- #Arendt1963 According to Arendt, how "normal" is Eichmann?
- #Arendt1963 252: What does Arendt mean by the "banality of evil"?

## Nils presentation notes
starts at 11:52
computer crashed at 12:01
nice biography, I liked that
but hard text -- and a little confused presentation
make sure your tech is working.

Alireza makes a really good comment about the genesis of religion; it's the lack of understanding, so theres suoerstition

## Bonhoeffer

>Von guten Mächten treu und still umgeben,
>behütet und getröstet wunderbar,
>so will ich diese Tage mit euch leben
>und mit euch gehen in ein neues Jahr.
>
>Noch will das alte unsre Herzen quälen,
>noch drückt uns böser Tage schwere Last.
>Ach Herr, gib unsern aufgeschreckten Seelen
>das Heil, für das du uns geschaffen hast.
>
>Und reichst du uns den schweren Kelch, den bittern
>des Leids, gefüllt bis an den höchsten Rand,
>so nehmen wir ihn dankbar ohne Zittern
>aus deiner guten und geliebten Hand.
>
>Doch willst du uns noch einmal Freude schenken
>an dieser Welt und ihrer Sonne Glanz,
>dann wolln wir des Vergangenen gedenken,
>und dann gehört dir unser Leben ganz.
>
>Lass warm und hell die Kerzen heute flammen,
>die du in unsre Dunkelheit gebracht,
>führ, wenn es sein kann, wieder uns zusammen.
>Wir wissen es, dein Licht scheint in der Nacht.
>
>Wenn sich die Stille nun tief um uns breitet,
>so lass uns hören jenen vollen Klang
>der Welt, die unsichtbar sich um uns weitet,
>all deiner Kinder hohen Lobgesang.
>
>Von guten Mächten wunderbar geborgen,
>erwarten wir getrost, was kommen mag.
>Gott ist bei uns am Abend und am Morgen
>und ganz gewiss an jedem neuen Tag.
>
>Text: Dietrich Bonhoeffer (1944) 1945/1951