#Seminar

Bring up picture of the Leviathan

We will answer three kinds of question
1. What *is* the state.
    That is an *empirical* question.
2. What *should* a state do?
    This is a *normative* question.
3. How did the state come *into existence*?
    This asks for a theory of social change.

## Status of Tilly's theory
It's a materialist one

Not:
- constitutional / social contract (rousseau, maybe hobbes)
- ethical / communitarian / identity (maybe de Toquevill, Bellah)
- pluralist
- but conflict / materialist (marx, tilly)


## How did the State Come into Existence
(this pertains to the third question)

1. close the door
2. names for the curve
3. primitives / antiderivative
4. war making (extending rule), state making (consolidating rule)
5. application: drugs, crime
6. application: failed states
7. application: mismatch between governance and technology
8. AK 47 video
9. strike out questions from this list
10. what does a state do? (mece definition)
11. wx
12. development of state capacity, limiting the leviathan
13. questions about democracy
14. done

This is based on our reading of Charles Tilly.
- Competing Racketeers A an B
- Protection from violence is the same as generation of that violence
- They enjoyed huge economies of scale in the production of violence (draw graph)
    - think a-bomb
    - think colonialism, failed states, failure in Iraq

Play Lord of War Video on the AK 47 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fAHXosoNlvo#t=26

More random fun links about the craziness/danger of Leviathans:
- http://kimjongillookingatthings.tumblr.com/
- http://www.korea-dpr.com/biography.htm


## What Should a State Do?

Or, put another way, what can *only* a state do?
(this pertains to the second question)

### The Tragedy of the Commons
- relevant reading is Hardin 1968

### Game Theory: Prisoner's Dilemma and other Cooperation Problems

>"Gentlemen, Adam Smith needs revision."
>-- fictional John Nash, in 'A Beautiful Mind' (2001)
><https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2d_dtTZQyUM>

Axioms of game theory (simplified):
- there can be no coordination
- players are self-interested
- players act independently
- players know the payoff matrix of themselves and all other players

Solutions to the Prisoner's Dilemma
- Iterated Games / Shadow of the Future / Tit for Tat / Reciprocity
    number of iterations has to be infinite or unknown
- Hierarchy, the State

And another fun illustration from the Dark Knight
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IUR3rCBmJk

### The History (of Ideas) of the State: Taming the Leviathan

Goal: Security
- Institutions:
    - (effective) monopoly on the legitimate use of force
    - The "Leviathan" (Hobbes)
    - Police
    - Military
- Thinker/Doer: Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679)
- Era/Event: Peace of Westphalia (1648)

Goal: Rule of Law
- Institutions
    - Constitution (written or unwritten)
    - Separation of powers / Checks & balances?
- Thinker/Doer: John Locke (1632-1704) 
- Era/Event: The Glorious Revolution (1688)

Goal: Democracy
- Institutions
    - (Parliamentary) democracy
    - (universal) Suffrage
    - free, fair and secret elections
- Thinker/Doer: Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826)
- Era/Event: The American Revolution (1776)

Goal: Welfare
- Institutions
    - The Welfare state, covering in rough temporal order:
        1. accident
        2. health
        3. pensions
        4. unemployment
- Thinker/Doer: Otto von Bismarck (1815-1898)
- Era/Event: Social reforms in Germany (1884ff)


#Reading


## Hardin 1968

- #Hardin1968 Why is there no technical solution to the tragedy of the commons?
- #Hardin1968 What is the Tragedy of the Commons? Can you think of examples?


## Tilly 1985

- #Tilly1985 Can you think of a situation today in which there are (still) competing racketeers? (Or, equivalently, in which the effective monopoly on the use of force is contested?)
- #Tilly1985 170: Why, according to Tilly, are threats of violence and protection from violence two sides of the same coin?
- #Tilly1985 For those who have covered it in school or elsewhere: How does Tilly's theory of the state differ from that of Rousseau (Social contract) or Hobbes (Leviathan)?


#Key Terms

- define #keyterm Prisoner's Dilemma
- define #keyterm Nash Equilibrium
- define #keyterm (Strictly) Dominant Strategy
- define #keyterm Social Welfare Optimum
- define #keyterm Leviathan
- define #keyterm Peace of Westphalia
- define #keyterm Positive vs. Normative Research
- define #keyterm State of Nature
- define #keyterm Modernization Theory
- define #keyterm Historical Materialism
- define #keyterm Racketeering
- define #keyterm Economies of Scale